Datatree release blog post (#736)
xarray-contrib/xarray.dev: src/posts/datatree/index.md

---
title: 'Xarray x NASA: New xarray.DataTree for hierarchical data structures'
date: '2024-12-04'
authors:
  - name: Tom Nicholas
    github: tomnicholas
  - name: Owen Littlejohns
    github: owenlittlejohns
  - name: Matt Savoie
    github: flamingbear
  - name: Eni Awowale
    github: eni-awowale
  - name: Alfonso Ladino
    github: aladinor
  - name: Justus Magin
    github: keewis
  - name: Stephan Hoyer
    github: shoyer
summary: 'The new xarray.DataTree class allows working with netCDF/Zarr groups, brought to you in collaboration with NASA!'
---

## TL;DR

> `xarray.DataTree` has been released in [v2024.10.0](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/releases/tag/v2024.10.0), and the prototype [`xarray-contrib/datatree` repository](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/datatree) archived, after collaboration between the xarray team and [NASA ESDIS](https://www.earthdata.nasa.gov/about/esdis).

Author: Is it [ESDIS](https://www.earthdata.nasa.gov/about/esdis), [ESDS](https://earthdata.nasa.gov/about), or [EOSDIS](https://www.earthdata.nasa.gov/about/esdis/eosdis)??? 😅

Reviewer: I think "ESDIS" is the way to go, or more specifically, the "ESDIS project". EOSDIS is the software stack for ESDIS, and it's a term that seems to be in the process of being phased out anyway.

Author: Is ESDIS the DAAC? I want to refer to whichever the correct name is for the org you represent (and I understand just "NASA" would be far too broad to be accurate).

Author: Wait and @eni-awowale and @flamingbear should your affiliations with GES DISC and NSIDC be included explicitly too?

Author: Updated to be consistent in https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xarray.dev/pull/736/commits/80a10d209158db9aa81ab66fb1127b31a0e4e252

## Why trees?

> Xarray users have been [asking](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/4118) for a way to handle multiple netCDF4 groups [since at least 2016](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/1092). Such netCDF4/Zarr groups are the on-disk representation of a general problem of handling hierarchies of related but non-alignable array data. Real-world datasets (such as [climate model intercomparisons](https://medium.com/pangeo/easy-ipcc-part-1-multi-model-datatree-469b87cf9114)) often fall into this category, and users wanted a way to work with such hierarchical data in-memory and a way to interact with it on disk.

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to describe the motivation for trees in a way that makes sense to readers who don't know what a netCDF group is.

I usually use the analogy of a directory struture. DataTree allows for organizing heterogeneous collections of scientific data in the same way that a nested directory structure facilitates organizing large numbers of files on disk.

I would also consider mentioning at least three distinct use-cases that illustrate what DataTree will enable. Perhaps:
- climate model intercomparisons
- image pyramids
- complex satellite data or geospatial rasters?

Feel free to adapt my words here (or I can also take a pass at this later).

Author: Good point, I'll add those suggestions.

Reviewer 3: If you end up enumerating here, it can't hurt to reiterate; simple, convenient access to an entire hierarchical file.

Author: Added in https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xarray.dev/pull/736/commits/22264dc4917a9e6e1aaffd50e67cc081087f138c

## What is a DataTree?

Our solution is the new high-level container class `xarray.DataTree`.

> It acts like a tree of linked `xarray.Dataset` objects, with alignment enforced between variables in sibling nodes but not between parents and children. It can be written to and opened from formats containing multiple groups, such as netCDF4 files and Zarr stores.

Reviewer 2: This description of the alignment requirement of DataTree looks backwards to me?
```suggestion
It acts like a tree of linked `xarray.Dataset` objects, with alignment enforced between parent and child nodes, but not between siblings. It can be written to and opened from formats containing multiple groups, such as netCDF4 files and Zarr stores.
```

Author: Oops you're right!

Datatree represents arguably one of the single largest new features added to xarray in 10 years - the migration of the existing prototype alone added >10k lines of code across [80 PRs](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3Atopic-DataTree+is%3Aclosed), and the resulting datatree code now contains contributions from at least 25 people.

We also had to resolve some really [gnarly design questions](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/pull/9063) to make it work in a way we were happy with.

## How did this happen?

DataTree didn't get implemented overnight - it was a multi-year effort that took place in a number of steps.

> Initially, the xarray team applied for funding from the [Chan-Zuckerberg initiative]() (LINK?) in March 2021 to develop something like datatree, citing bioscience use cases (e.g. [microscopy image pyramids](https://spatialdata.scverse.org/en/latest/design_doc.html)). Unfortunately whilst we've been lucky to [receive CZI funding before](https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/proposals/xarray-multidimensional-labeled-arrays-and-datasets-in-python/), on this occasion we didn't win money to work on the datatree idea.

Author: @jhamman @shoyer @dcherian is there a public link to the proposal we submitted? I had a look on the CZI website but couldn't find one. I think it would be interesting to see.

Reviewer 4: Here you go -> https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5484176

Author: Thank you!

A separate repository was chosen for speed of iteration, and to be able to more easily [make changes](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/datatree/blob/7ba05880c37f2371b5174f6e8dcfae31248fe19f/README.md#development-roadmap) without worrying as much about [backwards compatibility](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/9854) as code in xarray's main repo does. However the separate repo meant that the prototype `datatree` library was not fully integrated with xarray's main codebase, limiting possible features and requiring fragile dependencies on private xarray internals.

The prototype then sat there for 2 years, until the NASA ESDIS team approached the xarray core team in August 2023. ESDIS devs wanted the ability to work with entire hierarchical files, and had experimented with the prototype version of datatree, but they wanted datatree functionality to be migrated upstream into xarray's main repository so there would be more guarantees of long-term API stability and support.

> Amazingly the NASA team were able to offer engineer time, so starting in late 2023 Owen, Matt, and Eni (NASA) worked on migrating the prototype datatree into xarray upstream, with regular supervision from Tom, Justus, and Stephan (existing xarray team).

Reviewer 3: I just checked and folks at my org would like my full affiliation. I expect @eni-awowale and @owenlittlejohns will also need full affiliations. I see that it is unruly and long.
```
Matt (NASA National Snow and Ice Data Center Distributed Active Archive Center)
```

Reviewer: I guess just to throw out more detailed affiliations for Eni and I:

* I am on the NASA "EOSDIS Evolution and Development 3" (EED-3) contract.
* Eni is part of the Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center (GES DISC) - but I'm not 100% sure how GES DISC prefer that being represented.

Author: Added in https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xarray.dev/pull/736/commits/9dc4aafacf9d331775fd8ac8cbc08feeec996580

This contributing model is more similar to how open-source software has historically been supported by industry, but perhaps because xarray is primarily developed and used by the scientific community we tend to default to more grant-based funding models.

Overall we think this type of collaboration could work again in future! So if there is an xarray or xarray-adjacent feature your organisation would like to see, **please reach out to us**.

## Go try out DataTree!

Please try datatree out! The hierarchical structure is potentially useful to any xarray users who work with more than one dataset at a time. Simply do

```python
from xarray import DataTree
```

or

```python
open_datatree(...)
```

on a netCDF4 file / Zarr store containing multiple groups.

Be aware that as `xarray.DataTree` is still new there will likely be some bugs lurking or places that performance could be improved, as well as as-yet [unimplemented features](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Atopic-DataTree) (as there always are)!

## Thanks

> A number of other people also [contributed to datatree](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/datatree/graphs/contributors) in various ways - particular shoutout to [Alfonso Ladino](https://github.com/aladinor) and [Etinenne Schalk](https://github.com/etienneschalk) for their dedicated attendance at many of the [weekly migration meetings](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/8747)!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A number of other people also [contributed to datatree](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/datatree/graphs/contributors) in various ways - particular shoutout to [Alfonso Ladino](https://github.com/aladinor) and [Etienne Schalk](https://github.com/etienneschalk) for their dedicated attendance at many of the [weekly migration meetings](https://github.com/pydata/xarray/issues/8747)!
```

Author: I also just noticed that, thanks
